# 1.2 The Life-Span Perspective

- **The Life-Span Perspective**: an approach to the study of human development that includes all phases, from birth to death.
- Led to 4 insights: human development is 
  - multi-directional, 
  - multi-contextual, 
  - multi-cultural, 
  - and plastic. 

## Grown is Multi-Directional

- This refutes the traditional idea that development advances linearly and then plateaus.
- Sometimes **discontinuity** is found in change where it happens rapidly
- Other times **continuity** is found and change is gradual
- Or **stability** with no change
- **Gains and losses** 

### Critical Periods

- Some changes can be sudden and profound because of a **critical period**, a time when something *must* occur for normal development, or the only time for abnormality to arise
- The critical period for humans to grow their limbs, fingers, and toes is between day 28 and 54 after conception
- Between 1957 and 1961, thousands of newly pregnant women took thalidomide, an antinausea drug, which prohibits blood from reaching the embryo
- If taken between days 28-54, the infants would be born deformed. But after day 54, the infant would be normal.

### Sensitive Periods

- Humans have few critical periods
- Often particular development can be done more easily in certain times, although not exclusively
- For example, learning a new language is easier when your younger. Learning a new language later on will likely result in people noticing it is not your native langauge.

## Development Is Multi-Contextual 

- Everyone is profoundly affected by their surroundings, i.e. social context

### Ecological Systems

- We can take an ecological approach where ecology is the study of an organism's relationship to its enviromnet
- The ecological systems approach looks at:
  - **Microsystem**: immediate social contexts, such as family and peer group.
  - **Exosystem**: local institutions such as school and church
  - **Macrosystem**: cultural values, economic policies, and politics
- Two more systems affect these 3:
  - **Meosystem**: connections among systems
  - **Chronosystem**: historical context
- Finally the **bioecological system** is the internal biology of the person

### Historical Context

- People born within a few years of one another are a **cohort** like Millennials, Generation X, Boomers

### Socioeconomic Context

- Socioeconomic status (**SES**) reflects income, education, occupation, and neighborhood
- On average, the poorest Americans are the youngest, and the poorest adults are those with young children.

## Development Is Multi-Cultural 

### Social Constructs

- An idea that is built on shared perceptions, not on objective reality. For example. culture.
- **Difference-equals-deficit error** is the mistaken idea that unusual “beliefs, conventions, norms, behaviors, expectations” are not as good as conventional ones
- **Race** is the concept that some people are distinct from others because of physical appearance, typically skin color. Biologists agree this is a social construct.
- Actual skin color varies much more than color words suggests. 

### Intersectionality

- The idea that the various identities need to be combined. 

## Development Is Plastic 

- **Plasticity**: the idea that abilities, personality, and other human characteristics are moldable, and thus can change.
- People can be molded or maintain durability (just like plastic). This incorporates 2 facts into perspective:
  1. People can change over time.
  2. New behavior is affected by what has already happened.